i'm gary stevenson former trader and
people's economist this is gary's
economics today we've got a guest on the
channel mata zab cousin he's director of
cleanup gambling he's here to talk about
trading crypto gambling and everything
that's happening in the economy right
now
yeah and we'll get going yeah
nice
mata kazu welcome to the channel thanks
for having me so i'm just going to
introduce very quickly to the people
watching how we got to know each other
so um
as people who've been watching the
channel know i've been doing a lot of
talking about markets and about crypto
in the last couple of years
and um
because of the stuff that i've been
talking about a few of my friends sort
of saw stuff that i said about things
like gold going up things happen in the
markets and um they got involved in
financial markets they got involved in
trading
and um
i found that a few of my friends who
followed my tips actually managed to
lose money even though these were
winning tips and um
from that i started to realize a lot of
other people i know had gotten involved
in trading as well got involved in
cryptocurrency and um basically i saw a
lot of my personal friends losing money
um
i saw you give an interview on some
channel on tv about gambling
uh it sounded like you knew your stuff
you're obviously an expert in gambling
and um i got in touch with you to see
whether basically you had seen
these things happening because
the people we see on the internet
youtube and instagram generally talking
about online trading crypto
they seem to be making money but the
people in my personal life who are doing
these things seem to be losing money so
as an expert on gambling what are you
seeing yeah i think it's it's must be
very easy to convince yourself if you
bought into one of the cryptocurrencies
uh maybe
six seven years ago uh when it was a few
hundred dollars and you saw it go up to
thirty thousand forty thousand dollars
to feel like an expert to feel like you
really know your stuff
and to want to impart that wisdom to
others
so i think we're seeing a lot of that at
the moment there's lots of people that
bought into
bought into crypto very early on who
have made a lot of money that's it
that's indisputable
but they've made a lot of money because
they've been able to sell their crypto
to people who are buying in now
and
that needs to be sustained if people who
buy in now
want to make money as well so what you
see is a lot i think on social media now
is this phenomenon of almost what i call
crypto evangelism where you'll see
people buying into particular coins
and then becoming their biggest sales
people almost and
the newer kind of social media platforms
like tick tock i think are really geared
towards this because
if on tick tock the algorithm works in a
way that if you watch the piece of
content to the end it will start showing
you lots more of that topic and really
take you down rabbit holes and
the amount of videos you can watch on
tiktok in a short space of time
it leads it lends itself to almost
conditioning and
it can be very very persuasive
particularly if people have made money
in the past
so i think that all of these things
contribute to
fueling the crypto bubble
and that's really what it is because i
think people
i don't know i don't know to what degree
people are buying into it because they
feel like they're owning a piece of the
future or if people are buying into it
because
it's a speculative asset and they just
want to make a bit of money in the short
term
so my concern is i think if you are you
know a young person on the internet now
research these things yeah crypto and
it's not it's not just crypto there's
also fx trading
cfd spread betting all of these
trading activities have become massively
more popular in the last two years
if you search these things on for
example youtube
you'll see loads of videos of people
saying they've made loads of money
you'll see on youtube guaranteed fx
trading guaranteed 100 profit strategy
um
you know i see you guys on instagram
posting like 20 trades in a row they
made money on every trade
i think from the perspective of somebody
watching this on the internet
it seems like everybody's making money
um
but you know i'm a former professional
trader
and uh one thing i know about trading is
people
like to talk a lot more publicly about
their wins and their losses right
so i was wondering whether you as
somebody who you know you you work now
we'll talk a little bit about what you
do now you work in
for a gambling charity basically that
helps people recovering from gunning
addictions
are you seeing a lot of people who've
made losses on these things yeah i mean
our focus with cleanup gambling is
obviously we're trying to change the law
so we can prevent gambling related harm
and in the work that i do with with
ganban which is blocking software for
people to get addicted to gambling
we we work very closely with the
national gambling helpline with gam care
which provides treatment and they're
reporting a huge a huge increase in
people phoning the helpline saying that
they got addicted to
crypto cfds
forex all these types of
platforms that exist i think at the
moment
on the regulatory perimeter of the fca
of the financial conduct authority
they're not really
seen as gambling products but they are
linked to gambling related harm so we've
started to block these platforms now for
people that use gamba and the blocking
software because we think that if you're
addicted to gambling you know it's just
gonna you can self-exclude from gambling
and you can
block gambling sites with our software
but
it's not right that we leave those sites
those types of platforms accessible
particularly crypto and it's the
volatility of it you know i think that
you know anything that lends itself
even
um
day trading and you know
through retail investment platforms like
free trade anything that lends itself to
over trading and constantly checking
the
the app and
being nudged into
take changing your position all the time
which is what these platforms make money
on they make money on the commissions on
the trades
it's not optimum retail investment
strategy and like if you were actually
convinced that if everything in the
future in web 3.0 was going to be on the
ethereum blockchain
you wouldn't get hypersensitive about
people saying that crypto might crash
you would
yeah this i put a video up about crypto
in the last few weeks and um
i've been relatively outspoken that i
think crypto
is basically a scam we'll get a lot of
negative comments from me just saying
that i think that it's
yeah i think i think essentially it's a
scam basically you know
these coins are invented by
industries basically and they sell them
to ordinary people on the promise that
they will go up and people buy them
because they think they will go up um
what i find interesting i put this video
up is you know
i get very very angry replies about this
video okay and um
you know i'm a former professional
trader i was at one point
the most successful trader in the world
one of the biggest banks in the world
i've got very good track record trading
you know i've i've got my predictions
for this crisis out there published
people can go and look at my early
covered articles
everything that i said would happen has
happened gold price went up stock prices
went up house prices went up exactly
like i said would happen
um
and i'm i'm expressing an opinion about
markets
and you know when i say i think the gold
price will go up nobody gets angry
people that are huddling gold
start to troll you then yeah when i say
property prices will go up some people
get upset but nobody gets angry but when
i say i think the crypto price will
eventually fall
people blow up
um
why do you think it is
that people are so
emotionally attached
to the idea of crypto going up
because i think it's what it's what it
represents like
i think it is
it is like
people ha people have a lot invested in
it in terms like emotionally but also
financially people are involved
and
they do become as i say like they become
almost de facto sales people for these
coins because they want everyone to buy
in so
the price goes up
um
they
kind of understand this like that thing
like a little bit of knowledge is a
dangerous thing they kind of understand
what it is and the implications of it
and what it could be used for in theory
in the future
but they're perhaps not totally
convinced
about that yeah and it's interesting
what you say right if they were
genuinely 100
confident yeah that
these things are going to be used in the
future but then why do they care if i
say it's going to go down that's an
opportunity for them to buy more off of
me exactly you know buy more exactly and
yeah so it is it is a risk and it is a
gamble and i think reminding people of
that is
perhaps where it where the the
sensitivity comes in but but it it's
it's a very interesting phenomenon and i
think it's very unique to the time that
we're in in the this is the this is the
this is it is what is
often described as a disruptor uh it's
part of that kind of
you know we're moving from what people
describe as web 2.0 to web 3.0 there's a
lot like it's similar to the dot-com
boom you know when you had lots of uh
pump and dumps you had lots of penny
shares and all that sort of stuff people
were saying this is the next tip this is
going to be and obviously only a few
survived it was amazon it was the big
ones right yeah but but there was all
that kind of stuff around the dot com
boom so it's similar to that sort of
time where people think
oh maybe i could pick the coin that will
be underpinned the internet of the
future right
but there's so many coins now and and
there's
not really an understanding of how this
is going to work in practice i'll tell
you what concerns me so i met a guy the
other day
um i was just at some
japanese event and i met a guy from
milford actually which is my hometown
also simran's hometown cameraman who's
not yet been shown on camera he will one
day um nice guy
and you know
we were just doing the natural
conversation what do you do what do you
do and he said i'm doing this right now
but actually like my plan is to become a
millionaire
and i was like all right
i had to go do that then and um
he's gonna i'm gonna make my millions on
on on crypto you know when crypto goes
up i'm gonna make my millions and um
sounds good
it does
but
if this guy's a life plan
is to make millions on crypto right and
like
that's his long-term strategy
is this guy in a position
to unemotionally assess the long-term
prospects of crypto yeah or is this
person in a position
to be exploited by somebody who wants to
sell him crypto yeah exactly you're
leaving it it's exploiting a
vulnerability isn't it
that's it
and people people feel yeah emotionally
invested in it they're not looking at it
objectively
um
and yeah they i think that it's it's all
it's almost like uh
uh
because they don't fully understand
perhaps i think no one really fully
understands what the use case of it will
be in the future and how that would
actually work
people are taking a risk when they're
investing in it and they don't want to
feel stupid having done so and and
then they then they become very
defensive about it so
look i just think that it's part of the
part of the
symptom of the times that we're in at
the moment economically where so many
routes to
progressing and climbing the ladder of
social mobility have been cut off
through government policy through
central bank policy
um i mean this is you know my channel is
mainly about inequality right
and it's about letting people know look
if we don't do something about
inequality then we're going to get
really bad economic and human outcomes
for like you and for your family um
but far and away the number one most
common message i get on this channel is
come on mate tell me how to make some
money in the market
and um
i understand that number one right
because i've been poor and always like
to report when you're poor you don't
want to be poor and you're looking for a
way out right
um
but also
i don't know what to tell these people
because
there's no safe way to make money
nowadays like my dad
he worked for post office for 35 years
and you know we were never rich but he
was able to raise three kids
you know
buy his own property out right by the
end of that just working like a regular
job like no degree no special skills
you know you know like there's you know
the simpsons right yeah i like that meme
when they say that homer simpson uh it
was able to support a family and own a
house
you know a massive house
working at the power plant power plant
right yeah like that was it that was
that was normal yeah
yeah yeah
but it's that increasingly now
you will never get property doing that
you will never get probably doing that
you know like
i've got a mate he works in fashion but
he makes like 70 grand a year now you
know what i mean he's like it's like the
most money you'll make like for like a
regular job in fashion it's a great
salary right he lives with his mum saves
up every penny but the house price has
got quicker than his deposit
so like we live in a world where even if
you do everything right this guy went to
the top fashion union in the country you
know even if you do everything right
even if you work as hard as you can even
if you save everything you can't get
property
so
this puts young people in a situation
where they're thinking well what do i do
then
and then
if you then see on the internet a lot of
the guys saying like i made two million
pounds on crypt though it's fomo as well
right yeah you know i got friends
calling me up and saying you know you
must have this as well right calling me
up saying should i get involved in
crypto
and i just have to tell them don't do it
because it's dangerous man save up your
money as much as you can there are safer
avenues you can get and figure out ways
you can get yourself property you know
what i mean i have to tell them don't do
it because it's dangerous but like
the message i'm telling them is look the
situation is not good here and it's not
going to be easy but the message that
other guys are selling is
buy a car with my face on it you can be
a millionaire and you know who's got the
more attractive message here you know
so
but if you put sort of young people you
know not just young men but especially
young men who are getting judging these
finance financial outcomes so
aggressively
when you put people in this position
where there's no legit way you know if
work is not working you know if if what
our parents did work hard and safe
doesn't work then you're desperate right
and you you're you're looking for
anything
yes it's
it worries me it yeah absolutely and um
i think uh
i think yeah social the social media
culture and
scam culture is all kind of
uh i think it's it's a it's another
symptom of that because
look i think
we're in a we're in an era now where
everything is changing again
and there is going to be a lot of
disruption as i've sort of alluded to
before
but i think people's assumptions about
how protected they are as consumers
are being applied to things that
frankly are falling outside of
regulation or regulation
to the level that people expect
so when you're looking at things like
leverage trading on
stocks and things like that which is
basically gambling
and it's
marketed as a form of investment in in a
context where interest rates are very
low
yeah
and
because interest rates are very low your
money's not working for you
you're you're falling behind in terms of
how saving for a deposit and the house
price is going up even more
and you're looking for ways to to
accumulate
more money and uh
obviously crypto in that context is very
attractive yeah in the short term
because
that's what it is that's what people
treat it as they're not treating it as a
long-term investment they're not
treating it as oh this is going to be
the underpin everything we do in the
future yeah they're saying how can i
make a bit more money so i can exchange
it again for fiat currency and buy a
house that and
really if you're investing as you always
say you need to invest for a long term
right you take a long position
you touched on something
very interesting which i think is very
important which is the similarities
between
the trading investing behaviors of
people
doing some of the things that are
popular now crypto trading
foreign exchange trading spread paying
the similarities between that and
gambling
because
you know i was a former trader i worked
in the skyscrapers in canary wharf and
you see you guys there with gambling
addictions um
i was a foreign exchange trader for a
long period of time and now i've got
friends
who
consider themselves to be foreign
exchange traders
and i i look at what they're doing
to me
what they're doing is indistinguishable
from gambling
they're sitting down in the day and
they're looking at this little red bar
this little line a few green bars a few
red bars up and down up and down they're
trading trading trading this all the
time they're drawing lines on charts
to me
these guys might as well just be reading
their horoscope and then going into
betfair you know what i mean
like
that's not what professional traders do
no
um
but
they've been persuaded that what they're
doing
is trading but for me
what they're doing looks exactly like
gambling
um
and i think we're in this kind of sort
of dangerous space now where
things which i would consider are
basically gambling
have been
rebranded as investment
strategies and investment tools
um and what that means is you know
you know you do a lot of work with
gambling right and you presumably see
people who have addictions to sports
gambling or you know
yeah slot machines if people if people
get addicted and they lose way more than
they can afford
and they hit rock bottom hopefully you
can intervene before that point
obviously but if they if they're in that
moment then
you know everything they've been telling
themselves to rationalize gambling like
i'm one better away from winning it back
and all that sort of stuff
you can quite quickly
in recovery recalibrate that through
cognitive behavioral therapy you can say
things you can you know convince
yourself the opposite i went through it
myself as i was addicted to when i was
younger
where it's like you're never going to
win long-term statistically impossible
even if you win you're just going to
give it all back because you're addicted
so the only way to break that cycle is
to stop now if you're applying that to
things like trading
it's very easy for people to think well
i'm only losing money i'm a bad trader i
just need to become a better trader
and
i don't necessarily have to lose in the
long term there's people that win in the
long term i'm seeing them every day this
is the thing it's a rebrand like i think
you know we know that there's no
mathematical way to win at blackjack but
people still get addicted to blackjack
you know what i mean
we know that there's no mathematical way
to win long term at roulette but people
still get addicted to roulette um
but when you're talking about
trading
it's exactly as you say right trading
and trading crypto as well it's marketed
as if you understand how it works it's a
reliable way to make money nobody would
say that about most other forms of
gambling right so what it means is you
can become a gambling addict
without thinking you're even gambling
you can be thinking
i'm a traitor you know what i mean and
you know
i was a professional trader you know and
i worked in the city but i get paid a
salary i don't gamble my own money you
know when i'm in that space um
but people are sitting at home and i
think one thing i was talking to a
friend about this and i was like
most forms of trading especially any any
form of short-term trading it's a
zero-sum game for every pound you win
somebody loses right and not only that
but the
the websites themselves especially if
you're doing high-volume trading take
quite a big cut so that overall if you
had ever add up everyone's wins and
losses the losses are more than the wins
right so
and then so what we know is when
everybody comes to the table and
everybody leaves net net people are
losers okay bear in mind there are
people at a table like me
who
have got two economics degrees who have
spent six years trading 100 hours a week
you know when i was a trader
i wake up five in the morning i read 100
emails okay i know everything that's
happened overnight if i get into the
office i'm at the office at 6 30 a.m
i've got seven economists so i can just
press a button and speak to them every
piece of information in the world comes
to me first right i suppose you could
have even got the like all the resources
that that went into like you go to
brazil presumably like you'd send people
there and have a look at the i can speak
to anyone anywhere all the time all the
information comes to me right and
if you're doing like
day trading yeah you're competing
against people like me
who do this 100 hours a week who have
been doing it for 10 15 years who have
devoted the last 20 years of life to
doing nothing but this you know what i
mean and if you've watched it for
youtube videos
you know what are you going to do next
like
watch a few youtube videos on how to run
and race the same bowl you know what i
mean like realistically
is this a sensible strategy but people
think
they can win and i would add to that
even me when i was a professional trader
waking up at 5am every day i didn't day
trade
because it's that difficult to make
money in my opinion i was a long-term
trader you know
you make a long-term assessment you put
the money in you leave it you know that
was what i did because
it's a competition you know i mean
there's a saying
if you don't know who the idiot is at
the poker table then it's you
if you think you can beat the markets
you know you need to
understand you compete against
professionals and have a really good
understanding of what you have that they
don't have you know what i mean
otherwise you're probably not going to
beat them you know i know and i know
this is
people don't want to hear this message
because people want to believe they can
get rich from trading but it's the same
with gambling right people want to
believe they can get rich from gambling
if you want to believe they can get rich
from playing the lottery
i think
we're almost there with
um educating the public to the point
that
that there is an acceptance that no one
wins gamble like even if you were able
to get an edge over the bookmaker
betting on racing or sports they would
just close or restrict your account down
so you wouldn't so in theory you know
you can't win you can't win on slots or
roulette or blackjack long term because
of the the margin so
so i think we're kind of in that space
now where people are aware that it's
impossible to win long term so therefore
why are we not why do we not have strict
affordability checks why do we not have
you know
limits to stakes and all that sort of
stuff so it's quite it sort of flows
from that argument but we're nowhere
near that with this stuff with trading
it's to me it seems like a really
successful rebrand of gambling it's like
people know
that gambling
is a vice and that it's ultimately a
loser you know nobody's like oh my
friends got my friend spends all day
gambling that's great but people are
like i spend all day trading that's
great it's a really successful
rebranding of gambling in such the way
that it doesn't have these negative
connotations
in my view though i think even if
something
causes gambling related harm it should
have the same
protections so you should have things
like self-exclusion and limits and
and the gambling commission should be
able to say well because this causes
gambling related harm that should fall
within our remit to some extent
and at the moment that isn't the case
obviously if these platforms are
regulated it's by the fca even spread
betting is regulated by the fca
and there are reasons for that there are
other reasons for that but you just
don't have
that the same level of protections that
are supposed to be in place for gambling
obviously they're not obviously
delivered a lot of the time but even so
they ought to be better protections and
they should apply to these platforms to
prevent gambling related harm now
i think that you know with all of these
newer newer products with all of these
kind of
crypto derivative platforms
um there needs to be
an understanding that if
you're putting money into a cfd or into
a cryptocurrency
that is a form of speculating and if
you're putting money into a isa or into
a
an investment fund
that is a form of investing
like there needs to be a better
delineation between the two because at
the moment you can sign up to a platform
and
put money in an isa and they can
cross-sell the leveraged trading
and you think these things are totally
different
like how how can you have the same thing
how can i have that both on the same
platform
yeah i think the message i would like to
give i guess to the viewers
because the problem is that
there's this real spectrum
of things you can do that moves from
relatively sensible investment such as
open an isa and puts money into a
global stock tracker which is relatively
sensible long-term strategy although it
involves risk all the way up to sort of
leverage betting on
new cryptocurrencies which is basically
insane thing to do
and there's like there's such a spectrum
of gray in between
so i think
how do people differentiate um
i think a key
marker for me
is the frequency with which you do it
so
you know if you put some money in every
month and it goes into something
and it just goes in once a month you
open the platform money goes and you buy
that thing
that's probably not problematic behavior
although i would be i would caution
anyone against putting too much into
crypto i think there's a very real risk
that crypto goes to zero so if anyone
wants to have money in crypto it should
be considered very high risk should be
only money you can afford to lose but in
general if you're just
accessing it to invest
over a period of time
i would say that is
investment behavior although
it has to be said it has a risk
whenever you start doing multiple trades
in a day or to be honest even in a week
or really even in a month
unless you have some background as a
professional trader
you're gambling in my opinion do you
think that's fair yeah it is absolutely
fair i mean how can you compete as a
retail investor
you just can't and
yeah it is it is a gamble and i think
i think it's i think it's important that
people understand what optimum
investment strategy is and i don't think
that education is
anywhere at the moment with the public
and i think people are looking at this
stuff that's regulated as a as a as a
financial service and it's giving it
that veneer of legitimacy that it it
perhaps doesn't warrant
yeah there is no
video on the channel people like what
might want some sort of advice but in
general you know
open an isr
buy a range of relatively
sensible investments stocks can be risky
i like a combination of stocks and gold
diversify between things
don't pay any money into cryptocurrency
to lose 100 off that would be my advice
um but i think
so i just have a question about gold
then yes so people often say like that
bitcoin is a gold disruptor and it's a
store of value but in theory right
gold could it's very unlikely for gold
to ever go to zero because there'd
always be a use for gold like in
production yeah they need to wear
something in the hip-hop videos right
exactly and i'm sure it has other uses
um whereas
bitcoin has no use doesn't there's no
kind of is it microsoft
my concern with crypto is if you want
why does somebody buy crypto
realistically why do people buy crypto
90 in my opinion and people might want
to disagree
99 of the buyers of crypto
are people buying it because they think
the price will go up
that's why they're buying crypto they're
buying it because they think the price
will go up and that's how speculative
bubbles work
you know
and
and a lot of time they're buying it
because it has gone up a lot but that's
not sustainable you know
this is you know the way trading works
often is people like to buy things after
they've gone up a lot
and that is how speculative bubbles work
and these you know
only two years ago crypto was about
worth something like seven times less
than it is now
so it could go back there and five years
ago it's worth something like 10 times
less you know
this is an extremely volatile product it
could go to zero and i i believe in the
long run that these things will go to
zero and i know people out there are
blowing up because
i think if they are blowing up they
should ask themselves why am i so angry
about that so some some people will say
well in the long run everything goes to
zero because you know we'll we'll die
anyway i mean you say that but gold
hasn't been zero for a long long time i
mean this is what people do these are
the arguments you often see you often
see these kind of rationalities
your house you're gonna live in it you
know you buy land it's gonna make food
you know
gold has been a store of value for
literally thousands and thousands of
years you know
if you buy tesco you own those
supermarkets you own the land underneath
them you own the groceries inside them
you know i mean if you buy apple stock
you own part of those factories you you
own the pattern to the iphone you know
what i mean your own part of it when you
other things that you can buy
have physical underpinning you know you
actually there are physical assets in
this world and i've got a video on the
channel called what is world where we
talk about look there's property there's
land there's natural resources and
people own this stuff
you have a choice do you want to own the
physical resources of this world or do
you want to own these points on the
internet and when you give money to buy
these points on the internet there's
some guy out there selling you those
points to the internet taking your money
and using that to buy real assets i
guarantee it you know so
it's
it's not real i know people will be
saying but money's not real
so don't hold money as an investment
either you know money is a terrible
investment you know i keep enough money
just to pay my bills and to make sure
i'm okay
if something happens and i would
recommend anyone else to do the same
thing money is a terrible investment so
if money is a terrible investment the
only thing worse is imaginary money okay
people get very angry about it but it's
it's money is a bad investment and
money that some guy made up is a bad
investment as well you know what is a
good investment is real physical assets
you know and the best investment is
a household family to live in and you
should work towards that
yeah no i mean i don't disagree at all
um i
i do i do worry about
uh yeah just how much of a wild west all
of this is and how many people are
getting sucked in you know i i i came
across a platform that
was basically run by by fraudsters that
was taking people's money
and
saying they're going to pay you back in
over a period of time and they're going
to invest it in crypto
and
obviously it took all the money and and
ran off to bali so that was kind of you
know there's loads of these things that
people assume a degree of consumer
protection because we're so used to it
yeah we're so used to that it's a good
point i would recommend strongly against
anybody giving your money to anybody
else to trade crypto with or to trade
for an exchange with or to do day
trading with please please please don't
do that
please don't give the money to any third
party to do these behaviors because
those spaces are absolutely ripe for
fraud
at the moment and like you see
um
people sell things like a guaranteed
profitable strategy like my friend
follows this instagram follower who
trades gold and they post like they post
pictures like 20 gold trades in a row
saying i made money 20 times in a row
and what they're doing is like they're
buying gold like 1821 and selling it
back at 1822. so they're waiting for it
to move this tiny little bit up and then
take the profit you know if you do that
you're going to make money 99 times and
the one time you don't you're going to
lose 100 times as much but it's a great
strategy for advertising yourself on
instagram right
and
you know
it's very easy to make yourself look
good
by like making very very repeated low
risk low profit trades with ma which
have this very tiny chance of losing
enormous amounts of money and you can
get sucked into these so
yeah it's as you say it's a wild west
really it's a wild west and um the big
thing i want people to realize is most
of these things are zero-sum so if you
think everybody's winning they're not no
exactly and you only ever hear about the
winners right yeah so the losers are
invisible they are and i i come i mean
the first thing you've asked i come
across them a lot
in the work i do and uh
you know there's gam care as well um
getting a lot of calls about this on the
helpline yeah it's very very similar it
is it is just like gambling it's the
same type of behaviors and you probably
see how damaging it can be
yeah absolutely and and it lends itself
to chasing losses you think
you know and all this stuff about buy
the dip i mean no yeah dollar cost
averaging
yeah yeah
and i don't know if it's gone down it's
just a buying opportunity
putting more and more money in this is
classic when i it just sounds like
gambling
it's exactly yeah chasing losses right
and yeah and justifying the losses that
you've already experienced by saying
well oh okay well i can i can level this
out because i can buy more of this asset
that's going down and
you know
that's lost me loads of money already so
yeah i think people need to be aware of
all of these myths as well i know you're
doing a good job of like
educating people about the myths around
investing and
the terminology and all of these truisms
and uh
you know things that mislead people into
these bad behaviors and the unproductive
behaviors and i think that that's really
been missing and it's as it's that's
another thing that's right for
exploitation you've got this most
perfect storm
the lack of information
and the economic context and you know
you talked a lot about low interest
rates and how that's fueled all of this
stuff and i think that that's that's
part of the problem people looking for
a way to grow their money where one
doesn't exist at the moment
yeah i i want to talk a little bit about
just um
the the cases i've seen because i think
this like sort of shows how easy it is
right so
i'm a former professional trader at the
beginning of the crisis i wrote an
article for a website called open
democracy saying the gold price is going
to work stock prices are going to go up
probably prices are going to go up and
some of my friends got in touch with me
saying like oh can we make money on this
and at that time like i was quite naive
about
how dangerous this could be and i was
like yeah you know there's this and this
that you can do to put on the gold price
blah blah blah and a few of my friends
got involved
putting bets on the gold price um
and then a couple months later the gold
price dipped
and two friends separately called me up
like what are we gonna do we've lost all
of our money and like gold had gone up
sort of like 15 and dipped like three
percent and i was like how have you
people managed to lose money when it's
up 12
since
i told you this tip and what's happened
both these people did exactly the same
thing they went they waited for it to go
up like seven percent and then like gary
was right okay then they bought it they
went up another three percent and they
thought
i'm a genius not me gary they thought
they're geniuses because they've done
this great trade so then they buy more
gold and then it goes up a bit more and
then they're like i'm the best trader in
the world and then they buy silver and
they buy palladium and then they're
buying like ryanair stock you know and
then they're buying tesla stock and then
they're buying crypto and then suddenly
things dip and they lose everything they
made and more
and this is
this is what happens and really
i saw what these guys were doing and i
realized like oh my god
i've turned my friends into gambling
addicts
like by giving them a good
investment tip
they've become gambling addicts and the
the things that they did were insane
it's insane to do it it's insane to take
a tip from somebody else about gold and
suddenly become a palladium trader you
know what even is palladium you know and
then these guys become bitcoin traders
it's
it's crazy right it's crazy what's
happening um
but i think that just goes to show sort
of how easy it is
especially you know with these these
apps and these websites that make it
look so attractive and make you feel
like a trader yeah to
start investing and very quickly become
a gambling addict and have no idea
you've done it yeah
yeah totally agree um
yeah people very close to me have got
sucked into that stuff to cfds and
uh it can happen very yeah it can that's
how it happens you start to make a
little bit of money in the short term
and you think oh this is easy
i imagine if i leverage this and then
and it's on there on the same platform
it's just it's it's indistinguishable
from gambling to me it's
indistinguishable from gambling you
could be doing the exact same thing on
on on football results
it's the exact same sort of behaviors
somebody gives you a tip it goes well
you think oh that's great maybe i'll do
this maybe i'll do that you start doing
more yeah is it what's a what's a good
thing to
kind of uh
i don't know be aware of
that when it's sort of spilling into
gambling do you think that it's like
when you if you if you're like checking
it a lot obviously but you're only
checking it a lot because it's that high
adrenaline stuff yeah and you're you're
getting a bit of a buzz out of it i
think if there's like one quick sort of
fail safe
it's that trading frequency
if you are
really as an ordinary person i don't
think you should be doing more than one
trade a month and that one trade a month
should be i've got my paycheck i'm
saving 500 quid this month i'm saving
200 quid this month that goes into this
you shouldn't be trading more frequently
than that you shouldn't
you shouldn't like
who
who are you going to be are you going to
beat me you know what i mean
you're training against proper
professionals here you know
you know what are you going to do next
you know you're going to
you know are you going to do the olympic
long jump you know what i mean like
these guys are professionals you know
you need to be an investor and
investment is about long-term slow
growth i think another big red flag is
like chasing really aggressive growth
numbers
like if you're trying to make anything
more than really like five ten percent a
year and those themselves are aggressive
numbers yeah yeah you can't do that
without gambling you know
so
but the big thing is frequency if you
you know if you
are doing if you are opening it more
than more than once a week
you should not be doing that and to be
honest i think more than once a month
yeah it should be an investment that
you're trying to build up towards buying
a property in the long term and
frequency is the big blow up for me
so would you say everything everything
comes back to buying property that's the
sort of end game i mean for ordinary
people
it's so difficult nowadays
yeah exactly that's the thing um and you
know we could reach a situation sometime
and i think when i think property is a
bubble but the fact is you need a place
to raise your you know most you want to
have a family you need a place to raise
that family you know and it's expensive
and i'm well aware that increasingly
is not a realistic goal for a lot of a
lot of people a lot of families and i
wish that wasn't the case um
but yeah that needs to be your goal you
know that that is what gives you a
little bit of financial freedom a little
bit of financial security um
yeah i would say so
i think as as gambling's become
normalized i think
i think you could argue that that's been
the gateway to this type of
new ecosystem that's developed right
like
the normalization of risk taking and the
normalization of gambling and as being
embedding it in part of our culture
has perhaps
opened the doors to all this type of
other stuff where
the concept of risk-taking and
the act of it and and the prevalence of
it
we're so desensitized to that that
something like crypto is kind of
the natural next step um i think the way
2008 panned out is a big deal because
2008 we saw this massive financial
crisis where all the new people got
really badly hurt and yet traders made a
ton of money and the stock markets
exploded so then people suddenly saw
like
oh wait
doing the sensible thing doesn't work
you know but who else made money after
2008 in the last 20 years people who
like wildly over leveraged and bought
like 25 properties right we've created
this kind of economy where the people
who do mad risks
did well and yet the people who do the
sensible things like just save your
money up you know do a regular job
got really screwed over
um and i think now in 2020 like
especially on the internet people are
aware that that that will happen again
and that that is happening again like
we're doing the exact same thing since
coverage right like kovid
covid was the biggest ever single year
increase in wealth of the rich and the
super rich in this country the average
billionaire made 630 million pounds the
average
wealthy person saw their wealth
increased by 22 in one year which is
about like seven times the normal growth
rate the biggest ever one year growth
rate
in the biggest economic crisis is the
great depression and now
gas prices energy prices going through
the roof food prices going through so
ordinary families are going to be really
heavily hit here
whilst the rich are making more money
they've ever made stock markets are
going through the roof you know the gold
price has blown up property prices have
grown up so once again
we're seeing
an economy which deals with crisis by
punishing ordinary working families and
really rewarding
the rich
but ordinary people just see stock
markets going through the roof and
traders making money in the city and
they think i need to be involved in that
world yeah yeah yeah
it's a fomo thing again right as well
like it's and it's also making all of
that world more accessible so this whole
thing about um
certain retail investment apps
democratizing finance and democratizing
investing that gamestop thing was like
fight the power people are sort of
people are talking about people think
bitcoin is a revolution a lot of people
do they say this is the way that we
change the system
yeah exactly and um
so i think that that's a veneer
again another veneer that
really
hides what it's about and
you know it's
presenting something that
isn't
optimized for retail investors best
interests so something that encourages
and
makes money out of people over trading
and volume of trades
and masquerading as something that is in
their interest like oh we're making this
accessible to you for the first time
and it's exposing a demographic and
a section of society to
this type of
activity for the first time very often
and there's a there's a lack of
knowledge
the one thing that i worry about with
trading and with crypto
is that
you know i'm an economist and i focus on
what's happening in the economy and
i've made a lot of very successful
predictions that after 2008 we would
have basically a long-run economic
disaster
and i made a lot of money on that
because those predictions were right
because you wouldn't deal with
inequality and i think we're doing the
same thing again so i think we're
looking in a system now which is
basically guaranteeing more and more
ordinary families being driven into
poverty
and that's a systemic issue and that's
because successive governments have
dealt with crises in a way that hurt
ordinary families and benefit the super
rich
and
if we don't change that
that will continue
and the only way we're going to change
that is by ordinary people
pushing back coming together and pushing
back politically pushing back against
politicians aggressively saying we will
not accept this you need to do something
about inequality
and yet
things like
online trading and crypto
basically
appeal to sort of the most hungry the
most ambitious young people who want to
change their lives for the better in a
way that's completely individualistic
and non-politicized so it takes them out
of the political arena so these are the
people who should be fighting back and
saying
listen this is a system which is
screwing me screwing my family screwing
my parents screwing my kids screwing my
community and instead
they're on ig index trading bitcoin
that is the thing that really
you know besides the fact that a lot of
people are losing money and we're not
hearing about it
this is just it's like
it's giving people something to do
while basically their houses are being
taken from them and it just it makes me
sad to be honest to see that
we're losing this fight and like some of
our smartest young people who should be
helping us fight back
are being dragged into basically
trading internet points
on the systemic issue you made a really
good
uh point earlier when we were chatting
about
how covert has accelerated a lot of this
stuff you may have said this before yeah
but i thought it was just really
a really good illustration of
yeah so we've covered this on the
channel but we'll go through it again
which is like why covert has increased
in quality so badly right which is
economically what kobud was was
basically
banning rich people from spending money
that is what economically what it did
because if you're an ordinary person or
a poorer person the vast majority of
your expenditures are on rent food
mortgage bills and you still have to pay
all of those things in covid so your
expenditures don't really go down that
much you maybe you can't go to the pub
you save a little bit but if you're a
very wealthy person your expenditures
are largely on luxuries
you know expensive holidays or expensive
you know meals
lots of expensive things that all got
banned
so what that meant was during kobe
we basically banned the spending of the
rich
now
in normal times there's a sort of
circular flow of money which is when
ordinary people pay their mortgage or
their rent it goes to rich people but
rich people have very high incomes and
they spend a lot of money which drives
the wages of ordinary people but if you
stop rich people spending money
ordinary people still have to pay the
rent and they still have to pay the
mortgage so instead of money flowing
around in a circle it's just flowing
from ordinary families to the rich and
staying there
and then these guys have lost their
incomes
so what happens the government
substituted the incomes with printed
money and then from the perspective of
an ordinary person the situation seems
the same because you're getting an
income it's not from the rich anymore
it's from the government so you feel
you're unaffected but that money is then
flowing to the rich and just staying
there and just piling up and up and up
and up and up so from the very beginning
of kovis you could predict that at the
end of kovid
it's going to look like we're just
reopening the economy but we're not
we're reopening the economy with a
massive amount of cash in the bank
accounts of rich people and it's huge
right because the amount of money
printed was 450 billion pounds which is
10 000 pounds per adult but it all gets
accumulated by the rich so if that all
goes to the top 10 percent we're talking
about 100 000 pounds cash extra in the
bank account of every single rich person
in the country
and then afterwards when inflation blows
up everybody's like how did that happen
it's like everyone's sort of confused
about it which is driving me mad and i
think sort of the big thing which i'm
trying to push at the moment on the
channel is to make people aware look
this is not some natural disaster this
has happened because we allowed the rich
to profit enormously from kovid they've
got way more money it's government
printed money that's pushing price up
and that's making your life harder and
the obvious way to deal with that is to
tax this enormous amount of money
they've made but for some reason
nobody's talking about this enormous
amount of money the rich have
more money than they've ever had before
enormously more money than they've had
before and we have a crisis now which
seriously is going to mean ordinary
families can't feed their kids and heat
their homes
and yet the government is doing nothing
about taxing the rich in fact they're
raising taxes national insurance which
is attacks only on workers which
excludes the income of billionaires it's
that's crazy yeah it's crazy it drives
me bad yeah
what you're seeing now a lot in america
obviously is the growth of crypto
sponsors for things like state like
sports stadiums and
in spain they banned gambling ads you're
only allowed to
see uh show gambling as between like one
and five a.m so they banned it from all
like sports
la liga teams and they replaced a lot of
that with
the crypto
exchanges
okay classic and the
like uh cfd platforms and all that kind
of leveraged trading stuff
so i think like in our gambling review
here one of the things that i've been
pushing for is
if you're going to ban
um advertising gambling advertising or
restrict it in some way
the gambling commission needs to be able
to
identify
newer trends in like what are
effectively gambling products and those
restrictions should apply to those as
well because
that's what will happen otherwise i mean
already like watford sponsored by
stake.com which is not just a crypto
repository but a crypto casino
so it's gambling with cryptocurrency
um etoro sponsors a lot of uh
a lot of football teams now already um
that obviously has leveraged trading and
has crypto exchanges
so
yeah i think that that is there's a risk
that that fills the void
and i think that we have to we have to
future-proof our gambling regulation to
make sure it doesn't
yeah and people out there who are seeing
these uh
crypto names everywhere that legitimizes
it right and it makes them think it's a
safe investment yeah but yeah so this is
the thing like you you have you have the
the advertising standards authority
it's obviously very slow and it's not
really fit for purpose but
it's not able to act on things quickly
enough so it's out there legitimizing
itself attaching itself to football
clubs attaching itself to different
brands that
and and different cultural institutions
that people trust
and by the time it's done that
the damage is done it
sort of cemented itself within that
particular ecosystem so
so
all of a sudden then football clubs are
more dependent on that type of revenue
so then there's like a worry about over
regulating it so it's all about
legitimizing something that is
frankly damaging a lot of people already
well thank you very much for coming on
the channel hopefully
people who've been watching have learned
something about the dangers of trading
and crypto and hopefully you might have
saved some people from potentially
falling into addiction um
have you got anything you want to talk a
little bit about what you're doing that
you'd like the audience to check out
yeah i mean if you're interested in
gambling reform and obviously future
proofing our regulations so people are
protected if they're experiencing
gamma-related harm on these new types of
platforms then then head to
cleanupgambling.com
if you are addicted to gambling or
addicted to these types of platforms or
cryptocurrency
um
and or you know someone who is then
check out
that's blocking software and that's free
through
the national gaming helpline which is
on talkbandstop.com
okay thank you very much thanks